Impression:
Can be read in Overland, [here](https://overland.org.au/2023/03/rollercoaster-tycoon-and-the-art-of-niche-hobbies/).

I think there's something to the idea of niche artforms performed only for others who perform it. Truly, there *is* a lot of art out there to do.

Quotes/Annotations:
1. "Despite the proliferation of alternatives in the intervening two decades, there still exists a lasting—growing, even—internet community dedicated to the art form that is RCT ‘parkmaking,’ as it is referred to."
1. "The oldest RCT community is New Element, an unofficial fanpage and old-school forum running almost continuously since 2002 with a particular emphasis on the minutiae of detailed theming and beautiful park composition. Every year, New Element runs a major competition, whose formats varies on a roughly three-year cycle."
1. "Indeed, the argument over what constitutes ‘art’ in RCT rages continuously in the Discord, for better or worse—I’m quite certain the most common descriptor leveled at New Element is ‘elitist’. Are we the arbiters of an extremely avant-garde artistic form? Or are we faithful nostalgists, obsessed mainly with the kitsch and commercialism of real-life theme parks?"
1. "The answer does not really matter, of course, except to ourselves. But the question of how to consider and critique the creative output of niche communities like New Element is endlessly fascinating."
1. "There are just a lot of *things* being created out there, in mediums the majority of us have never even heard of."
1. "Now, of course, you can study animation at university and read as much art theory as you like about cartoons. But those early years, where the most discerning audience of the animators was other animators, is really what I find myself dwelling on the most. Theme parks, like animation, are similarly just ‘silly slapstick for children.’"
1. "I could sit here and try and persuade you of the ways in which ‘theme park design’ is a novel artform. But to some extent, the real beauty of this kind of work is that it doesn’t have an external audience. The visual arts, literature, film—people who don’t do them, still appreciate. Nobody else cares about RollerCoaster Tycoon, except the people who care about RollerCoaster Tycoon. There is a particularly pure joy to be found in such holistically creative collectives."
1. "As a writer, I spend too much time awake at night worrying about building an audience for my work. And yet, I spend even more time awake at night, planning my next RollerCoaster Tycoon park in my head, for an audience of the hundred-or-so RCT parkmakers I care about the most."
1. "The RCT community takes itself very seriously—because it is serious. And also, it is kitsch, and niche, and tacky, and two decades dated, but I care about winning its competitions as much or more than I care about getting a book published. I’m barely even exaggerating."
1. "There is something fundamental here about the capacity of humans to cope with ‘audience’. At the end of the day, it seems, all I really care about is doing art for our friends. It’s good to be reminded of that sometimes, when the writing rejections pile up and the angst of future careers sets in. Maybe we should all choose an incredibly random video game from 1999, or any strangely niche hobby or group of weird people and jump into their Discord. There’s a lot of art out there to do."