Impression:
I actively hated the first half, and the back-half just felt like generic middling-to-bad fantasy. I hate the clumsily handled AIDS metaphor, the sloppy prose, the cardboard characters, and the absolute lack of respect the book has for me as a reader.

Quotes/Annotations:
1. "Clay blinked, having lost himself in his own head. He did that sometimes, and could have wished he was better at putting his thoughts into words. He’d sound a right clever bastard then, wouldn't he?" - Christ this is bad prose
1. "Gabriel blinked. “Clay hates mushrooms.”
Seeing Ginny’s back stiffen, Clay spoke up. “Used to,” he said brightly, before his wife—his quick-tempered, sharp-tongued, utterly terrifying wife—could turn around and crack his skull with that wooden spoon" - Oh good, we're doing the "wife is a nag" bit.
1. "Gabriel ignored him, pressing on. “Anyhow, Rose wanted to learn the sword, so I indulged her. I figured she’d get bored of it sooner or later, and that if she was going to learn, it might as well be from me. And also it made her mother mad as hell.”
It would have, Clay knew. Her mother, Valery, despised violence and weapons of any kind, along with those who used either toward any end whatsoever." - Oh my *god* why does this book hate women so much.
1. "Conthas was the same old circus he remembered. No king meant no law; no guards to keep the peace or discourage violence before it got out of hand. No taxes meant no one to clean gutters or lay down stone for roads" - Oh hell yea, we've got some super cool political opinions today.
1. '"Pike,” Clay said by way of greeting.\“Heard you were dead.”\“Close. Married.”\The First Shield snorted. “Kids?”\“One. You?”\“Seven.”' - I thought this guy was supposed to like his wife? He keeps telling us he does, at least
1. "Is he fool enough to believe she might make him a king? Clay could almost pity the boy if he actually thought so. Lilith would no more want for another husband than she’d want a rotting pumpkin for a head. It was likely she’d assumed upon marrying Matrick that he would drink himself into an eternal stupor and leave the governing to her. Instead he had risen to the task and become, by all accounts, a competent, compassionate king. Now she would rule alone,..." - Holy shit what is *up* with the women in this book?
1. "He’d done many a good deed during the years he’d toured with Saga, but he’d done bad things, too, and had seen too many bards die in too many ways to sleep well at night. He was tormented by his dreams, and even awake he was haunted by his violent past. He mistook every galloping horse for a charging centaur, every ring of a blacksmith's hammer for a distant clash of arms. Wherever there was smoke, Clay Cooper saw fire." - It's *wild* that we have to be told this, 100+ pages into the book, instead of being properly shown this man's PTSD like... at all. This isn't even the first fight he's been in! Or the first time he's killed someone in the book!
1. '“Is nice, yes?” The kobold gave the crossbow a loving pat, which rattled the bolts and set the trigger wire trembling. Clay went rigid, Gabriel flinched, while Moog and Matrick each tried to place themselves in front of the other and ended up in an awkward embrace.' - Why.. choose to write like this?
1. "He was wearing goggles as well, and also, unbelievably, the exact same pyjamas as Moog, except he had a tasselled cap and pointed slippers to match" - Mate, this prose is hot garbage.
1. "The quiet sullenness that seemed the dominant part of his nature these days had returned, and not without reason. Gabriel had vouched for Fender and his wife to move from the sewers into the slightly less foul-smelling streets above. He no doubt felt responsible for Oozilk’s capture. Her death (because Clar couldn't imagine a kobold lasting long in the arena) would join the many burdens camped like crows on the frontman's shoulders, from letting his band fall apart, ..." - How unbelievably dumb does this book think that I am?
1. "Whereas Kallorek’s nickname was a testament to his brutish manner and prodigious overbite" - Mate, you said he had an underbite the one other time you've described him.
1. "She wore a tightly-cinched bodice that proffered her breasts like melons at a market stall" - Continue to fuck all of the way off
1. 'Moog reached out to touch the snake-stone hair of one of the ancestral busts, while Matrick found his reflection in a nearby mirror and raked self-consciously at his tousled hair.\“I know the whole ‘gorgons turning men to stone’ thing is a myth," he said quietly, "but I'm hard as a rock right now." Clay levelled a glare at the man who'd been his king less than a week ago. "Seriously?"' - AAAAaaaaAAaAAAaaAAaaa
1. "The gorgon’s ample chest swelled, forcing Clay to look at something, anything else, and he found himself examining her tail instead" - Stop. Go directly to jail. Do not pass go.
1."He chuckled into his bowl as he raised it, drinking deep." - Hey, sorry, what?
1. '“Four centuries ago, when your ousted Emperor and the exiled remnants of the Imperial court arrived in Endland, they found it already inhabited by what you humans so broadly refer to as monsters. They fought with the cathiil over lands they wished to settle, and when the cathiil elected to migrate further west the innocent people of Castia hunted them to extinction."' - Oh good, we're doing this.
1. "Come to think of it, he was surprised word of the Heartwyld Horde had reached him before Gabriel did." - Are they ever going to address this? (they did not)
1. "They had a saying up north: the coin that broke the dragon’s back. It was derived from the idea that a dragon hoarding one trinket too many might drown beneath the weight of its own avarice, and it meant—or at least Clay thought it meant—that even the mightiest of things (dragons, for example) had a point at which even the smallest detail could signify their doom.\ They had a similar saying down south: the straw that broke the camel's back" - I am *going* to throw things.
1. "He loved the boys like brothers—even Ganelon—but although Clay was awfully good at killing things, the thought of doing so for another ten years while avoiding the ire of a vengeful monarch didn't sit with him at all. He’d wanted to go home, to leave violence in his past, and, more than anything, to try and live up to the words he'd scratched onto the birth that marked his mother's grave all those blood-soaked years ago." - Something something PTSD tho
1. "It was an inn, an alehouse, a brothel, and a gambling den. It was a place for fences to fence and whores to whore, a haven for drunks, a sanctuary for addicts, a seven-storey circus that Clay hadn't known how much he’d missed until he walked through the door with his band at his back.\ It looked much the same as he remembered it: the bar, the booths, the dicing tables scattered in the centre of the room" - Boy howdy does this man love to list things.
1. "his voice scratched like a suit of shoddy chain mail." - Hey, sorry, what?
1. "booker named Kallorek. In a tavern called the Loose Moose, the Orc (as Kal was more commonly called back then)" - Please just pick one. Side note: the Loose Moose is a [real place](https://theloosemoose.ca/) in Toronto.
1. "It was so strange to see Ganelon sitting there, twenty years younger than he ought to have been. The warrior scratched at the scar below his left eye" - Fuck this is lazy. It's a shame this prose+plotting is all so tight there was no way to indicate how he might be younger than he should be. Fresh 20 year old injuries, maybe.
1. "Clay caught Moog and Matrick sharing an eager grin. These two idiots are actually enjoying this, he thought, while trying to suppress his own … well, he certainly wouldn't have called it excitement, since excitement implied an optimism he didn't particularly feel about what awaited them in the arena, but there was, admittedly, something undeniably thrilling about hearing their name on the lips of so many thousands of people." - But the.. PTSD.. though?
1. "Clay’s tongue had gone dry as cured beef, and it tasted like someone had ashed a whisky-drenched cigarette in his mouth"
1. "The crowd cheered wildly, having apparently deciding to make the best of things." - having apparently deciding.
1. "Clay’s skid brought him between his friend and the flame, which battered harmlessly against Blackheart’s weathered face. The force of it knocked him back into Ganelon, and the two of them sprawled helplessly as the chimera advanced." - I am *begging* you to pick one. That's also not how fire works.
1. "ram’s yellowed teeth bit at him, missing by inches. Matrick responded by stabbing his right-hand dagger sideways into its eye. The beast screamed—a disturbingly human sound—and tried again to bite him. Reacting without thinking, Matrick offered his entire left arm to the creature's maw, twisting at the last second so that as its jaw clamped shut the knife in his hand plunged up through the roof of its mouth and (allegedly) into its brain, since it died immediately." - ?????
1. "He rolled onto his back, but before he could rise it pinned him down" - "But"?
1. "His sword, too dull to be effective, glanced harmlessly off the armouring scales." - Kill fluffy kittens.
1. "Vanguard’s skyship, which the band had found half submerged in a swamp during their last tour of the Heartwyld, was small but remarkably comfortable" - Is this something Clay actually knows? How new is this?
1. 'Flying over the Heartwyld is near as bad walking through it. There’s lightstorms and sparkwyrms …”\“Plague hawks,” said Tiamax.\“Manticores,” Ashe chimed in.\“Lamias,” Barret added' - Aren't Lamia snake people? Why are they a sky threat?
1. '“Piglet,” said Moog, “forgive me, but can I ask about your father?”\The boy slurped at his mug. “Like how he died, you mean?”\“Yes, please. If you don’t mind …”\Piglet shrugged. “It was the rot.”' - Cool, two gay men and an "incredibly obese" man. Sick fantasy AIDS
1. "Tiamax cracked a polished wooden shaker into halves and poured a cherry-coloured drink into Matrick’s empty glass.\Matty smiled..." - How the hell does he decide which name to use when?
1. 'Moog blew out a long breath before opening his eyes. He tried on a smile that vanished the moment he opened his mouth to explain. “My foot,” he said quietly. “It’s on my foot.”\Another silence followed, but this time it was loaded, the ominous hush of an axed tree falling earthward. Matrick exploded from his chair, charged the wizard, grasped the collar of his robe in one hand and pinned him,..." - AIDS metaphor's going well, I see.
1. '“Why are you even here right now?” The king’s voice skirled higher with every word, strained near to breaking by rage and grief and disbelief. “You should be locked in that shitty little tower of yours day and night—day and fucking night—until you find a cure.”\“There is …” Moog managed to gurgle "... no cure."\ "THERE'S A FUCKING CURE!" Matty screamed. "Do you hear me, you shit-brained sorcerer? There is. A fucking. Cure."
1. "They walk five abreast up the eastern slope of the hill upon which Kallorek has constructed his lavish citadel" - Why are we suddenly in present tense for exactly 3 pages?
1. "On his way back toward Gabriel he saw the sarcophagus over which Gabe and Kallorek had tripped during their previous visit" - In the same sentence, even??????
1. '“Grooms of Tamarat! You’re as heavy as a stone!”\Ganelon, who had been a statue these last nineteen years, found that remark positively hilarious' - You know, in case you forgot.
1. "Blackheart (from whom Clay had carved the wood for his beloved shield)" - AaaaaaAaaaa
1. "The savages came at them from everywhere at once, yipping like jackals and hurling a volley of shoddy spears as they stormed in. Gabriel blocked one missile with the flat of his blade and cut another in half before it impaled Matrick." - Cool politics you've got there bud, your people living in the forest are both cannibals and "savages".
1. "His head struck a tree and made a sound like a ceramic pot dropped on the floor" - Aren't we too wet for that?
1. "Rot.\She wasn’t sick, then,..." - A second wildly obese character afflicted with fantasy AIDS, huh?
1. "Clay decided to yell, but then realized he was already yelling" - Ugh
1. "Moog proposed they slit Matrick open, unspool his guts, and take shelter in his belly for the night" - Cool Star Wars reference my guy.
1. "Oh, and he had a new hand" - exactly 13 ebook pages, two chapters, sans hand. Did he ever even staunch the bleeding?
1. "A flurry of snow gusted between teeth like shattered tombstones" - A wonderfully weird sentence.

