Impression:

I'm getting Borges vibes, despite how different this collection of short stories is from the Borges I've read, topically: it's been grabbing me in the same way, and that's high praise.
The stories most notable to me were "The End of a Dynasty, Or The Natural History of Ferrets", "The Siege, Battle, and Victory of Selimmagud", and "Basic Weapons", even if I didn't quote all that much from them.

Quotes/Annotations:
1. '"Oh, that's all right," the emperor may say, "let's not obsess about money. A theater's never expernsive, because what goes on inside it teaches people to think and understand themselves. There's some jewel in the palace, some fortune down in the basement ot cover the cost. And if nothing turns up, we'll ask all the actors in the Empire to send the profits from one day, one emvening, one show, to help build a theater in Sariaband, where some of them will act some day..."
1. "Change, what there was of it, occurred on the roofs and rooftops and terraces, from which rose the symbols of the innumberable religions - images, stars, crosses, spheres, shafts, some of them fancy, some of them humble, all competing for the most followers in the shortest time. For there were feuds, battles, even wars between the sects, over a forgive-my-sins here or an absolve-me there, over a dozen renegades or a half-dozen apostates, over a ritual murder or a tonality in the dogma. But that brought no changes. That people were arguing over religion instead of politics or money didn't change the direction of streets or knock down old buildings or get new ones build. It merely increased the population."
1. "They were not men; nor were they wolves, nor hyenas, nor vultures, nor eagles. They were blind organisms, mindless, nerveless, without feeling or thought, with only the power to wound, and blood to shed. They didn't think, believe, feel, see, or hope; all they did was kill and kill again; all they did was retreat and retreat again, and attack again, and kill again. They had been born, they had worked, loved, played, grown to manhood for nothing but this, to kill in the fields of the North under the walls of a mossy, flowery city. Fifty hours after the first attack not more than a hundred men were still afoot, naked, dirty, blody, maimed, mad. They didn't know or care who the enemy was: they went on killing, attacking, shouting with their lacerated mouths, weeping from their wounded eyes, breathing through their split nostrils, holding their weapons with what fingers they had left, returning to attack, to kill."
1. "I'd never seen the Great Empress. How could i have? I lived in a humble house in a humble district., like most people of my profession I had few friends and those few were as poor and obscure as I was, and obviously storytellers don't enter the imperial palace. If one of them does he isn't a storyteller, he's a poet. And yet I entered the imperial palace. I wasn't a poet, I'm not a poet, I never will be, yet I entered the imperial palace."
1. "But of course I haven't even told you who he was. He's worth remembering because it's worth remembering everythign you meet in life, just for its own sake"
1. "It wasn't because I was generous that I wanted him to die in bed not i na ditch. Just the opposite. If the old man died in the street I'd be taken up, no matter what, being so young, and the police would have free use of me till some bureaucrat stuck a seal on a paper saying that the old man died from natural causes...i Then they'd let me go again, onto the streets, without the wagon, without anything, worse than before."
1. "I didn't believe in magic but still I kept the three stones because how can you not believe in magic? I don't say it doesn't exist, all I say is I wouldn't trust one minute of my life ot it."
1. "The emperor was too busy breating to hear this,..."
1. '"Because it's easier to get sick than to look for one's right place in the world. ... We keep adding needles things, false things to ourselves, till we ca't see ourselves and forget what our true shape is. And if we've forgotten what shape we are, how can we find the right place to be? And who dares pull away the falsities that are stuck to his eyelids, his fingernails, his heels? So then something goes wrong in the house and in the world, and we get sick."' - Seems a little... yikes?
