
1. The four common archetypes of Staff-plus roles I encountered are:
1. Earlier in their career, they will have implemented their team’s most complex technical projects, but at this point, they default to delegating such projects across the team. They do this both to grow their teammates and in acknowledgment that the team’s impact grows as the Tech Lead’s coding blocks shrink. While they’re coding less, they are still the person defining their team’s technical vision, and stepping in to build alignment within the team on complex issues.
1. Another factor is that the day-to-day work of a Tech Lead is most similar to the work you’d already be doing as a Senior engineer, making it a fairly intuitive transition. Most importantly, an organization needs roughly one Tech Lead for every eight engineers, making it far more common than other archetypes.
1. Indeed, you’ll find non-Staff engineers acting with the behaviors of every archetype. Being a Staff-engineer is not just a role. It’s the intersection of the role, your behaviors, your impact, and the organization’s recognition of all those things.
1. The Architect role tends to evolve in relatively large companies, companies with exceptionally complex or coupled codebases, and companies that are struggling to repay the technical debt they created in their initial sprint to product-market fit.
1. Success in these roles requires remaining engaged; it’s essential to understand what kinds of work energize you. The Tech Lead and Architect tend to work with the same people on the same problems for years, developing a tight sense of team and shared purpose. Some months their focus will be a top company priority, and sometimes they’ll be humming along so well that executives forget their team exists.
1. The Solver and Right Hand bounce from fire to fire, often having more transactional interactions with the folks they’re working with on any given week. They’re tightly aligned with executive priorities and are likely to receive recognition for addressing leadership’s most pressing problems. On the other hand, while they’ll nominally be on a team with other folks, there will generally be little-to-no overlap within their team’s areas of focus, and they’ll often have a limited sense of community.
1. Their daily schedule varies a bit by archetype, but there’s a shared foundation across all archetypes: setting and editing technical direction, providing sponsorship and mentorship, injecting engineering context into organizational decisions, exploration, and what Tanya Reilly calls being glue.
1. One constant across all roles is that the reality of setting technical direction is far more about understanding and solving the real needs of the organization around you and far less about prioritizing technology and approaches that you personally are excited to learn about. In earlier roles, you may have tried to influence decisions towards technology choices you were motivated by; in senior positions, you’re accountable to the business and organization first and yourself second.
1. You’re far more likely to change your company’s long-term trajectory by growing the engineers around you than through personal heroics.
1. These brief moments of input on critical decisions are unduly impactful and will allow you to inject an engineering perspective where it would otherwise be missed. Just remember that you’re representing the interests of all of engineering, not just your own.
1. In the long-term, companies either learn to explore, or they fade away; this isn’t an ignorable challenge. Simply assigning a team that’s mastered hill-climbing to do exploratory work is far from a sure thing, so many companies take a different approach. They find a couple of trusted individuals with broad skills, allocate some resources, and check back in a few months later to see what they’ve discovered. One of those engineers is often a Staff engineer.
1. This is some of the most rewarding and the riskiest work companies do. It takes a great deal of organizational trust to be trusted with this work, including having enough respect from the business that if you fail, it’s a reflection on the problem and not you.
1. Tanya Reilly wrote a wonderful post, Being Glue, which captures another core element of successful Staff engineers: doing the needed, but often invisible, tasks to keep the team moving forward and shipping its work.
1. Many folks take on Staff-plus roles believing it will give them access to the most visible or exciting work. That’s true to some extent, but it depends on the Staff archetypes which are most prevalent at your company. For example, Solvers often do get access to the most interesting work. Conversely, a Tech Lead would probably be undermining their team if they operated that way.
1. Increased organizational authority does provide new tools for solving problems, but successfully retaining organizational authority in a well-managed organization requires a great deal of nuance and restraint. If you have a problem and believe that your title is the only thing holding you back, I want to reassure you that focusing on developing your approach and skills will be far more impactful than the title. The title will get you over the ledge once you’re close, but it’ll never do as much work as you’d expect.
1. The one consistent exception to this rule is that women and minorities often do find they spend significantly less time and energy, proving themselves once they attain a Staff-plus title.
1. As you deliberately practice in each of these areas, you’ll slowly progress from a newly minted Staff engineer to a trusted organizational leader. That said, these won’t cover everything you do. At times you’ll find your role surprisingly similar to that of an engineering director, and at other times strangely familiar to previous work in your career.
1. If you’re continuing to advance in your career, then even as your time available for work shrinks, the expectations around your impact will keep growing. You can try sleeping less or depriving yourself of the non-work activities you need to feel whole, but you’ll inevitably find that your work maintains an aloof indifference to your sacrifice rather than rewarding it. Only through pacing your career to your life can you sustain yourself for the long-term.
1. First, a discussion on a few common ways to get tripped up: snacking, preening, and chasing ghosts. Then we’ll get into the good stuff: how do you work on what really matters?
1. Where “snacking” is the broad category of doing easy and low-impact work, there’s a particularly seductive subset of snacking that I call “preening.” Preening is doing low-impact, high-visibility work. Many companies conflate high-visibility and high-impact so strongly that they can’t distinguish between preening and impact, which is why it’s not uncommon to see some companies’ senior-most engineers spend the majority of their time doing work that’s of dubious value, but that is frequently recognized in company meetings.
1. Many folks would assume that companies, rational optimizers that they are, avoid spending much time on low-impact high-effort projects. Unfortunately, that isn’t consistently the case. It’s surprisingly common for a new senior leader to join a company and immediately drive a strategy shift that fundamentally misunderstands the challenges at hand. The ghosts of their previous situation hold such a firm grasp on their understanding of the new company that they misjudge the familiar as the essential.
1. Of course, your instincts are right! Taking the time to understand the status quo before shifting it will always repay diligence with results.
1. had a recent discussion with someone who argued that new senior leaders deliberately push for major changes even though they suspect the efforts will fail. Such changes make the organization increasingly dependent on the new leader and also ensures anything that does go well gets attributed to the new leader directly rather than their team. If this is your approach to leadership, please know that you’re awful and take the time to work on yourself until the well-being and success of an entire company matter to you more than being perceived as essential.
1. If something dire is happening at your company, then that’s the place to be engaged. Nothing else will matter if it doesn’t get addressed.
1. Existential issues are usually not the most efficient place to add your efforts, but efficiency isn’t a priority when the walls are crashing down around you. You should swarm to existential problems, but if a problem isn’t existential, then you should be skeptical of adding your efforts where everyone’s already focused. Folks often chase leadership’s top priority, but with so many folks looking to make their impact there, it’s often challenging to have a meaningful impact.
Instead, the most effective places to work are those that matter to your company but still have enough room to actually do work.
1. Sometimes you’ll find work that’s worthy of attention but which an organization is incapable of paying attention to, usually because its leadership doesn’t value that work. In some companies, this is developer tooling work. In others, it’s inclusion work. In most companies, it’s glue work.
There is almost always a great deal of room to do this sort of work that no one is paying attention to, so you’ll be able to make rapid initial progress on it, which feels like a good opportunity to invest. At some point, though, you’ll find that the work needs support, and it’s quite challenging to get support for work that a company is built to ignore or devalue. Your early wins will slowly get eroded by indifference and misalignment, and your initial impact will be reclaimed by the sands of time.
1. Teaching a company to value something it doesn’t care about is the hardest sort of work you can do, and it often fails, so you should do as little of it as you can, but no less. As a senior leader, you have an ethical obligation that goes beyond maximizing your company-perceived impact, but it’s important to recognize what you’re up against and time your efforts accordingly.
1. Hiring has a lot of folks involved in it, usually in terms of optimizing the hiring funnel, but onboarding, mentoring, and coaching are wholly neglected at many companies despite being at least as impactful as hiring to your company’s engineering velocity.
If you start dedicating even a couple of hours a week to developing the team around you, it’s quite likely that will become your legacy long after your tech specs and pull requests are forgotten.
1. With your organizational privilege, relationships you’ve built across the company, and ability to see around corners derived from your experience, you can often shift a project’s outcomes by investing the smallest ounce of effort, and this is some of the most valuable work you can
1. It’s surprisingly common that coaching a teammate on how to tweak a project into something finishable and then lending them your privilege to budge the right friction points will transform a six-month slog into a two-week sprint with almost an identical impact.
We only get value from finishing projects, and getting a project over the finish line is the magical moment it goes from risk to leverage. Time spent getting work finished is always time well spent.
1. The final category of work that matters is the sort that you’re uniquely capable of accomplishing. Sure there’s work that you’re faster at or better at than some other folks, but much more important is the sort of work that simply won’t happen if you don’t do it.
This work is an intersection of what you’re exceptionally good at and what you genuinely care about.
1. The reality is that good engineering strategy is boring and that it’s easier to write an effective strategy than a bad one.
To write an engineering strategy, write five design documents, and pull the similarities out. That’s your engineering strategy. To write an engineering vision, write five engineering strategies, and forecast their implications two years into the future. That’s your engineering vision.
If you can’t resist the urge to include your most brilliant ideas in the process, then you can include them in your prework. Write all of your best ideas in a giant document, delete it, and never mention any of them again. Now that those ideas are out of your head, your head is cleared for the work ahead.
1. Strategies allow everyone–not just the empowered few–to make quick, confident decisions that might have otherwise cost them a week of discussion. Strategies are also the bricks that narrow your many possible futures down enough that it’s possible to write a realistic vision. If you realize that you’ve rehashed the same discussion three or four times, it’s time to write a strategy. When the future’s too hazy to identify investments worth making, it’s time to write another vision. If neither of those sound like familiar problems – move on to other work for now and return later.
1. Whether a given project requires a design document comes down to personal judgment, but I’ve found a few rules useful. You should write design documents for any project whose capabilities will be used by numerous future projects. You should also write design documents for projects that meaningfully impact your users. You should write a design document for any work taking more than a month of engineering time.
1. Keep the template simple. Most companies have a design document template, which is a great pattern to follow. However, those templates are often expanded to serve too many goals. Overloaded templates discourage folks from writing design documents in the first place. Prefer minimal design document templates that allow authors to select the most useful sections and only insist on exhaustive details for the riskiest projects. Gather
1. It takes a lot of practice to write great design documents. If you want to improve yours, my best advice is to reread your designs after you’ve finished implementing them and study the places where your implementation deviated from your plan–what caused those deviations? Oh, and of course, just keep writing more of them.
1. Prefer good over perfect. It’s better to write a good document and get it in front of others than it is to delay for something marginally better.
1. Gather and review together, write alone. It’s very unlikely that you personally have all the relevant context to write the best design document on a given topic. Before getting far into the process, collect input from folks with relevant perspectives, particularly those who will rely on the output of your design document.
1. Good strategies guide tradeoffs and explain the rationale behind that guidance. Bad strategies state a policy without explanation, which decouples them from the context they were made. Without context, your strategy rapidly becomes incomprehensible–why did they decide this?–and difficult to adapt as the underlying context shifts.
1. Working on strategy, it’s easy to be paralyzed by the inherently vast ambiguity we work in, but you’ve just got to dive in and start writing. Waiting for missing information doesn’t work: every missing document is missing for a good reason.
1. Write until you start to generalize, and then stop writing. If you can’t be specific, wait until you’ve written more design documents.
1. Good strategies are opinionated. If they aren’t opinionated, then they won’t provide any clarity on decision making. However, being opinionated on its own isn’t enough. You also need to show your work. Show
1. Don’t measure vision by the initial excitement it creates. Instead, measure it by reading a design document from two years ago and then one from last week; if there’s marked improvement, then your vision is good.
1. At a well-run and successful company, most of your previous technical decisions won’t meet your current quality threshold. Rather than a failure, closing the gap between your current and target technical quality is a routine, essential part of effective engineering leadership.
1. As we dig into this toolkit of approaches, remember to pick the cheapest, most straightforward tool likely to work. Technical quality is a long-term game. There’s no such thing as winning, only learning and earning the chance to keep playing.
1. As you think about the right quality improvements to make for your team and organization, it’s generally most effective to start with the lightest weight solutions and only progress towards massive solutions as earlier efforts collapse under the pressure of scale. If you can’t get teams to adopt proper code linting, your attempts to roll out a comprehensive quality program are doomed. Although the latter can be more effective at scale, they’re much, much harder to execute.
1. The previous example of an untested deploy might benefit from giving direct feedback to the deploying engineer about changing their testing habits. Alternatively, maybe you’re better served by acknowledging that your software design is error-prone and adopting the “define errors out of existence” approach described in A Philosophy of Software Design.
If
1. Channel all your energy towards making one practice a success rather than splitting resources across a handful.
1. Genuine best practice has to be supported by research, and the best source of research on this topic is Accelerate.
1. , the handful that I’ve found most helpful to adopt early are version control, trunk-based development, CI/CD, and production observability (including developers on-call for the systems they write), and working in small, atomic changes. There
1. One of the hidden powers of investing in leverage points is that you don’t need total organizational alignment to do it. To write a technical vision or roll out a best practice, you need that sort of buy-in, which is why I recommend starting with leverage points.
1. Encapsulate your approach in your workflows and tooling. Documentation of a clear vision is helpful, but some folks simply won’t study your document. Deliberate tools create workflows that nurture habits far better than training and documentation. For example, provisioning a new service might require going to a website that requires you to add a link to a technical spec for that service. Another approach might be blocking deploys to production if the service doesn’t have an on-call setup established, with someone currently on-call, and that individual must also have their push notifications enabled.
1. Some representative components to consider including in your quality definition:
What percentage of the code is statically typed? How many files have associated tests? What is test coverage within your codebase? How narrow are the public interfaces across modules? What percentage of files use the preferred HTTP library? Do endpoints respond to requests within 500ms after a cold start? How many functions have dangerous read-after-write behavior? Or perform unnecessary reads against the primary database instance? How many endpoints perform all state mutation within a single transaction? How many functions acquire low-granularity locks? How many hot files exist which are changed in more than half of pull requests?
1. Rules of thumb are tricky here, but maybe one engineer working on developer tooling for every fifteen product engineers, in addition to your infrastructure engineering investment.
1. fresh. Code and process change over time, and your intuition is going stale every week you’re away from building product features. Most folks find that team embedding and team rotations are the best way to keep your instincts relevant. Others monitor chat for problems, as well as a healthy schedule of 1:1 discussions with product developers. The best folks do both of those and keep their metrics dashboards
1. Trust metrics over intuition. You should have a way to measure every project. Quality is a complex system, the sort of place where your intuition can easily deceive you. Similarly, as you become more senior at your company, your experience will no longer reflect most other folks’ experiences.
1. When you’re building for the entire engineering organization, anything you do well will accelerate the overall organization. Anything you do poorly, including something almost great with too many rough edges, will drag everyone down.
1. There’s a fundamental tension between centralized quality teams and the teams that they support. It’s often the case that there’s a globally optimal approach preferred by the centralized team, which grates heavily on a subset of teams that work on atypical domains or workloads.
1. It’s a good sign when your team has more available high-impact work than you can take on: if you aren’t selective about which projects to take on, then you’re not thinking broadly enough.
1. quality program isn’t computer code at all, but rather an initiative led by a dedicated team to maintain technical quality across an organization.
1. The technical components of running a quality program are the sorts of things discussed above, so here we’ll focus on managing a program effectively. Your first step is to find a technical program manager who can co-lead the program and operate its mechanics. While you can make considerable progress on an organizational program’s informational aspects without a technical program manager; however, it’s a trap. You’ll be crushed by the coordination overhead of solo-driving a program in a large organization.
1. Identify a program sponsor. You can’t change an organization’s behavior without an empowered sponsor. Organizations behave the way they do because it’s the optimal solution to their current constraints, and you can’t shift those constraints without the advocacy of someone powerful.
1. It’s common for folks running a program to spend four-plus hours a week maintaining their dataset by hand. This doesn’t work.
1. Your program has to identify specific goals for each impacted team. For example, reducing test flakiness in their tests or closing incident remediations more quickly. However, it’s essential that you provide the map to success! So many programs demand participation from other teams without providing clear directions on how they can accomplish their part. The program owner is the subject matter expert, don’t offload your strategy to every team to independently reinvent.
1. The best dashboard is going to be both a scorecard for each team’s work and also provide breadcrumbs for each team on where to focus their next efforts.
1. Use nudges to direct the attention of teams towards the next work they should take towards your program’s goals. Remember, attention is a scarce resource! If you waste folks’ time with a nudge email or ping, they won’t pay attention to the next one.
1. If you find yourself struggling with technical quality–and we all do, frequently–then start with something small, and iterate on it until it works. Then add another technique, and iterate on that too. Slowly build towards something that genuinely works, even if it means weathering accusations of not moving fast enough. When it comes to complex systems and interdependencies, moving quickly is just optics. It’s methodical movement that gets the job done.
1. Titles come with the sort of power called organizational authority, and that variety of authority is loaned to you by a greater organizational authority. What’s bestowed can also be retracted, and retaining organizational authority depends on remaining deeply aligned with the bestowing sponsor, generally your direct manager. To remain effective within a Staff-plus role, you have to learn the art of staying aligned with organizational authority.
1. Most mature technology companies succeed in creating a predictable promotion pipeline from folks joining early in their careers up through attaining the Senior engineer title. The process of getting a Staff title is generally more complex than preceding titles but usually navigated with the support of your engineering manager. Throughout this pipeline, you may become comfortable with your manager guiding your development and providing a safety net for your continued success. After reaching a Staff role, your safety net will cease to exist, or at best, the safety net will be short enough that you’re quite capable of jumping past it and into the awaiting chasm. This will be increasingly true as you go further into Senior Staff and Distinguished engineer roles.
1. To align with your manager, some areas to focus on are:
1. Never surprise your manager. Nothing destroys trust faster than surprising your manager. Steering a large organization often involves juggling several projects and problems in your head at once, and surprises threaten the juggler’s rhythm. Large or frequent surprises also call into question whether a leader is truly taking responsibility for their organization.
1. Don’t let your sponsor surprise you. Most folks have extremely high expectations of their managers, assuming, for example, that they will always remember to relay information relevant to your current work. Managers try to do this, some of them are excellent at it, and others are not particularly good. If your manager isn’t great at this, you should certainly give them feedback, but you should also take proactive action to facilitate information flow. This might be weekly email updates or a Slack thread within your team’s channel sharing your focuses for the week.
1. Feed your manager’s context. If the first step is avoiding surprising your manager with your own actions, the next step is to help your manager not get surprised by the wider organization. If teams are frustrated by a new policy or your internal tools aren’t scaling with needs, proactively feed that to your manager. Be clear that you’re not bringing them a problem to solve, rather conveying information you believe will be useful.
1. Your first approach to solving this problem might be replacing your vision with another leader’s vision, and that approach works for some, but for many, it means stepping away from the perspective that facilitated their success as a proactive leader with strong judgment. Instead, I recommend sharpening your awareness of the distinctions between the values that you hold and those that the organization operates under and find a way to advocate for them without getting kicked out of the room.
1. The lesson that I slowly learned was that you couldn’t be an effective long-term leader until you learn how to follow.
1. continued growth requires learning to incorporate your worldview into the worldviews of those around you, accelerating overall progress around you even if it means tolerating a detour from your vision.
1. If you ever find yourself in a conversation with an unclear goal, then define the purpose. Take a moment to ask if your understanding of what the group hopes to accomplish is correct. This works best as a statement wrapped in a clarifying question along the lines of, “Just to check, our goal here is to decide whether to postpone launching the project by two weeks?”
1. In addition, longevity as a senior leader is just as much about maintaining your relationships as it is about standout successes.
1. Along with the shift in mindset, there are a few techniques that I’ve found helpful in creating more space in discussions:
1. Be the one to take notes. This helps destigmatize note-taking as “low status” and also frees up an alternative would-be notetaker to contribute more instead.
1. If you see someone in the meeting who isn’t participating, pull them into the discussion. It works best to pull exactly one person at a time into the discussion.
1. It was also on that project where my manager helped me understand that my first impulse as a tech lead didn’t scale. Initially, I was thinking, “I’ll break it into twenty pieces, assign out eighteen pieces, and keep the two hardest for myself,” and my manager pushed me to delegate the hard pieces to the team to stretch and develop them.
1. If a piece of feedback won’t meaningfully change a project’s success, then consider not giving it. If it’s useful but not critical, potentially make a private suggestion rather than pulling a meeting into your orbit
1. Some senior folks feel like they need to weigh in on everything to justify their seniority. Others require each decision to exactly mirror a similar decision they once made. Both of these center insecurity over impact and prevent others from growing as leaders
1. This final step is sponsoring others for the kind of work that got you to a Staff-plus role. When critical work comes to you, your first question should become, “Who could be both successful with and grown by this work?
1. Importantly, when the work becomes theirs, you have to let it be theirs. Councel, give advice, provide context, but ultimately sponsorship includes letting them take an approach that you wouldn’t.
1. If you need a rule of thumb, keep a sponsorship journal and ensure you’re sponsoring others at least a few times a month – if you find yourself sponsoring less frequently than that, dig into what’s stopping you.
Conversely, if you look back and can’t think of anything you’ve worked on directly in the past few months, that’s worth course-correcting too.
1. The only way to remain a long-term leader of a genuinely successful company is to continually create space for others to take the recognition, reward, and work that got you to where you’re currently sitting. It can be surprisingly uncomfortable, but don’t worry: there will always be new work for you anyway.
1. As I talked to more and more Staff-plus engineers about career advice, the most consistent recommendation was to develop a personal network of peers doing similar work. Not every person emphasized this approach, but more than half mentioned it, and for those who did, it tended to be their first and strongest recommendation.
1. Among the various tactics to build your network, the two most common strategies are: being easy to find and networking internally.
1. If the idea of building a network this way feels uncomfortable then building an ambient network can be a good starting step in the right direction. That said, you’ll find the personal network more impactful, and finding an authentic way to build one is an important step towards reaching and remaining impactful in senior roles over the long arch of your career.
1. In most other scenarios, miscommunication creates latency rather than errors. Still, when you’re communicating with executives, you’ll often not get a second chance to discuss a given topic before the relevant decision is made. Invest ahead of the discussion to avoid lamentations afterward.
1. When you’re communicating with an executive, it’s almost always one of three things: planning, reporting on status, or resolving misalignment.
1. There are many structures that can work, but I’d particularly recommend every document’s opening paragraph follow the SCQA format:
1. Relatively few folks employ a formal structure for the entirety of their document, but there is at least one popular format that some folks find valuable: Minto’s Pyramid Principle from the aforementioned book.
1. After you’ve written your structured document, gather feedback on it from your peers and stakeholders. Aligning with stakeholders before your presentation, sometimes called nemawashi, is extremely effective at reducing surprises.
1. It’s very common for an executive to have a critical piece of feedback but to not quite have the right framing to communicate it within the moment. You want them to deliver the feedback anyway, not hold it back and probably forget to give it later. If you show up as resistant to feedback, then they’ll start swallowing their comments, and you’ll get relatively little out of the meeting. Focus on gathering feedback; don’t worry about whether you agree with it until you have more time
1. A frequent piece of advice given to new leaders is to “never bring your manager a problem without a solution.” That’s not generally great advice, but if you present a problem to an executive without a proposed answer, then in the back of their mind, they’re wondering if they need to hire a more senior leader to supplement or replace you.
1. You can’t create alignment in the room unless you have a proposal for folks to align behind.
1. Presenting to executives can be intimidating, and this might be more advice than helpful. If you want to boil it all down to one concise tip: send an early draft to an executive attending the meeting and ask them what to change. If you listen to and apply that feedback, you’ll figure out the other pieces as you go.
1. Staff engineer isn’t a better Senior engineer, but someone who’s moved into fulfilling one of the Staff archetypes. Even
1. About two-thirds of the Staff engineers I surveyed attained their title as a promotion at the company they were already working at, and the remaining third changed companies to attain the title. If
1. The final caveat I’d give for someone considering this switch is that people management is bigger than simply maximizing your trajectory to a Staff engineer role. You’ll have a profound impact on the folks you support as a manager, and if you take it on with the wrong motivations, you’ll regret the experience, but not nearly as much as your team will.
1. Roughly half the women I spoke with had to change companies to attain the Staff title, whereas promotion friction come up less frequently during discussions with men. Don
1. For traversing towards your Staff-plus promotion, a general template format that’s useful
1. . Many folks choose not to pursue the Staff level; you should have a reason why this is important to you. If you don’t, you’re liable to find yourself in a role you don’t enjoy.
1. Whether your company does ad-hoc promotions or uses a calibration process, promotions are a team activity and as Julia Grace, then of Slack, advised me once during a job search, “Don’t play team games alone, you’ll lose.”
1. The first step of activating your sponsors is explicitly sharing your goals. “I’m looking to be recognized as a Staff engineer” is a great start.
1. Focus on asking for what the gaps are in a way that doesn’t prompt your sponsor to make up an answer. Most folks forget they can answer questions with, “I don’t know,” and instead make up unhelpful answers if you push them to answer questions they’re uncertain about. If you keep getting answers like, “Work on larger, high impact technical projects,” then you’re asking in the wrong way, the wrong questions, or the wrong person.
1. Sponsors are folks with more organizational capital than bandwidth to deploy that capital, and they’ll help you most when you align the pieces for them. Ask your sponsor how you can support their sponsorship.
1. One starting prompt is, “If I don’t get promoted this cycle, what are some of the likely causes?” Another question worth asking is, “What’s the most effective thing I can do to make myself a stronger candidate?” That said, the best questions are very specific and do a lot of the work for the answerer.
1. Finally, remember that activating your sponsor isn’t a transactional thing to do once before your promotion. Build a relationship over time, and put in the work to help them when they need your support. Stay aligned with their initiatives. Suppose they need folks to join a working group, volunteer, and put in the work. These folks have a lot of people asking them for things, and they are pretty cognizant of folks who show up right before promotion time. I once had a colleague who rarely visited the office but always visited the office the week before promotion decisions were made. People noticed.
1. The short answer on Staff projects is that most engineers don’t complete one as part of reaching a Staff role, although a large minority do complete one, particularly folks who attain the role via promotion at a company they’ve grown up in. For the folks who don’t complete one, typically, it’s either because they accumulated a track record of success over a longer period without a single capstone or because they switched companies to reach the title.
1. My advice is that although you can attain a Staff-plus role without completing a Staff project, they’re a particularly valuable opportunity to develop yourself as an engineer. You will personally be stretched and grown by this kind of project in a way that you won’t be by other varieties of Staff level work.
1. Although each of these projects is different, there are a few typical characteristics that capture why they’re so effective at stretching you as an engineer:
1. While deciding that you want to take on a Staff project is the first step, you still need to get access to these projects, which depends on your management chain trusting you enough to bet on your success.
1. Early in your career, it might be a sprint pre-planning meeting with your tech lead and product manager. Later it might be a quarterly planning meeting, an architecture review, the performance calibration, the engineering leadership team, or the executive team. There will always be another room to enter. To reach senior levels, you have to become effective at not only entering but also staying in these rooms of power.
1. To get into the room, you need:
1. To get into the room, you’ll need someone to sponsor your membership. Your sponsor is allocating their social capital towards your inclusion, and their peers will judge them based on your actions within the room. These rooms often have a mix of seniority levels, so it’s often the case that your sponsor’s manager is in the room evaluating them based on their decision to sponsor you.
1. There are a few patterns that will consistently get you kicked out of the room:
1. Staff-plus roles are leadership roles, and by recognizing you with such a position, the company is bringing you into its leadership team. The existing members of that team want to be comfortable that they’re expanding their ranks with folks they believe in, and they can’t believe in you if they don’t know you. If
1. The single best way to create internal visibility is to work on the things that matter to your company and company leadership. This path is also the most aligned with how a well-managed company will evaluate your contribution. Sometimes that isn’t enough, though, and some other strategies are:
1. It’s helpful to complement your internal visibility work with external visibility work. There are many successful Staff-plus engineers with no external presence, but many find external visibility contributes to their career.
1. In terms of how to create this sort of visibility for yourself and your work, it could be giving a conference talk like Keavy McMinn or Dan Na, going on a podcast like Michelle Bu, turning a problem into a website and book like Katie Sylor-Miller’s ohshitgit, or creating a mailing list like Stephen Whitworth’s High Growth Engineering.
1. You can always have more visibility within your organization, but at some point, increasing your visibility is likely reducing the opportunities for others
1. My advice would be to use the promotion packet exercise to identify if the lack of visibility is likely to hold you back in the promotion process. If so, work to clear that threshold, but not much further. Visibility is a transient currency. Learning and developing yourself is a permanent one; focus on the latter once you’ve done the minimum to clear the former’s cliff.
1. your current team is very senior, it may be hard to justify your impact at the Staff engineer level because it’s being attributed to your peers. Your manager might have a limited budget that doesn’t have room for another Staff engineer. You might lack an internal sponsor. There simply might not be the need for an additional Staff engineer at your company. Any of these can mean that while you ought to be promoted, you won’t be at your current company.
1. When you’re trying to identify a company to make the Staff transition to, there are a number of company values to consider in your decision. One that’s particularly important is understanding if the company’s leadership fundamentally subscribes to an exception-heavy “meritocratic” view of the world or a consistency-heavy “proceduralist” view.
1. Some ways to explore during your interview process to help distinguish these mindsets:
1. When looking for a company to pursue a Staff-plus role at, a big part of the equation is identifying a company where you’ll have an effective sponsor. Interviewing outside of your current company is often effective at finding you a sponsor: your would-be hiring manager tends to have well-aligned incentives to extend you a Staff offer. Equally important, your time investment is high but still relatively low compared to working at a company for two years to realize you’re never going to reach your goal.
1. Getting a Staff-plus offer at a new company requires someone inside that company who believes in you and is willing to push through a fair amount of organizational friction to get you the title. Getting promoted to Staff-plus requires a manager and management chain who believe in you and their willingness to push through even more friction to get you the title. Without an empowered leader within a company who’s willing to invest their organizational capital in you, you can’t get a leadership role.
1. Somewhat more subtly, you also have to consider the longevity of your would-be Staff sponsor.
1. Derisk durability by ensuring you join companies with business models that actually work and work for leaders who are values-aligned with their organization’s senior-most leadership (that way, even if they leave, you’re still aligned with potential sponsors
1. The engineering leadership phase of your career may last twenty years, but if you think of that in terms of roles, how you spend that time will likely come down to four or five pivotal decisions. Each of those decisions is a scarce resource, and you should allocate them deliberately.
1. There are certain signals you’ll get during an interview loop that indicate that the company doesn’t quite know how to interview Staff-plus engineers. Because most companies have mediocre Staff-plus interview processes, you shouldn’t automatically opt-out of poorly run processes, but you should consider which of those signals represent a line you’re unwilling to cross.
1. One line that many folks in Staff-plus roles draw is they’re unwilling to practice interview programming. This often means they are slower or make more mistakes in the sort of algorithmic questions that many companies use to evaluate early career candidates. Folks who don’t practice take that stance because they’ve decided that a company who cares about fast programming is likely to misuse its Staff-plus engineer.
1. The three most important things to understand before you start interviewing are:
What are the interview formats, including what are they evaluating for? Do any of the interviews require specific preparation? Who are the interviewers?
1. This is also a moment to debug if you’re in the right process. If your interview panel is composed primarily of early-career and mid-level engineers, it will rarely generate a Staff-plus offer; the panel will be ill-equipped to evaluate your strengths, and folks are often resistant to offers more senior than their own. If there are no deep-dives into your previous accomplishments and no presentation opportunities, it’s similarly hard to demonstrate the expertise to support a Staff-plus offer.
1. Back in 2012, Patrick McKenzie wrote Salary Negotiation, which has since become the defacto guide to negotiating salaries for software engineers. It’s a great piece and a good primer on how you’d negotiate any offer, including a Staff-plus offer: if you haven’t thought about this topic much before, start there. For
1. However, there is a threshold where offer negotiations shift, and companies are willing to engage in a bespoke offer rather than a system-driven offer, but you’re expected to somehow intuit that you’ve crossed the threshold–no one will ever tell you.
1. This sort of bespoke offer starts with more flexibility around compensation, and in particular more flexibility around the equity component of your offer. That said, it’s more than just the raw compensation. It’s also about other aspects of the offer that the company doesn’t generally have flexibility around but is willing to make private exceptions around for senior leaders.
1. . As a rule of thumb, if a company has more than twenty and fewer than five hundred employees, it’s pretty unlikely they are going to do much custom work for you unless you’re coming into a quasi-executive role–they simply don’t have the operational ability to do so. However, if a company has thousands of folks but only a dozen at your level, it’s fairly likely they’re open to negotiating bespoke terms. It
1. Whatever you attempt to negotiate, take the time to frame your request in a narrative of why it’s important for you. For example, I worked with one senior candidate who framed their request for an extended exercise window in the context of having just bought a house and recently exercising their previous company’s equity after leaving. That’s a lot more palatable than just asking for more cash compensation. 