Impression:
This felt like a pretty fun read, lots of interesting info.

Quotes/Annotations:
1. "Often, people lament the rise of 'crony capitalism' as if cronyism is an aberration of good operating practices. In reality, crony capitalism is not a perversion of business as usual. It is business as usual. In Guistra's words, 'generaosity can be very profifitable.'"
1. "A curiosity noted by early anthropologists such as Malinowski is that gift-giving often increased the power of the initiator of a gift exchange more so than the recipient"
1. "Other people's inequality is just as economically fruitful for some countries as it is hurtful to those who suffer from it."
1. "[The Homestead Strike] held for four months before the strikers admitted defeat. After the stand-off reached its whimpering close, the strike leaders were charged with murder, but each was acquitted by symathetic jury members. The entire Strike Committee was then arrested for treason against the state. Once again, they were acquitted. By sympathy alone can't feed families: suffering from the deaths of lost friends, desparate to feat their families, the fight for fair working conditions was vanquished. Carnegie and Frick's triumph is widely thought to have kept unionization out of the Carnedie plants until deep into the twentieth century."
1. "Carnegie publically defended trade tariffs by claiming they directly benefited labour, enabling him to pay his men better wages. But in the years after the 1890 imposition of a nearly 50 per cent duty charge on imported steal, Carnegie did the exact reverse."
1. "Ford shared Carnegie's belief that the wealthiest in society were best placed to understand the needs of workers 'far better', in Carnegie's words, than the workers themselves. Ford's staunch opposition to labour unions was rooted in his view that union leaders tended to undermine efforts to increase overall productivity."
1. Ford's workmen were placed under strict surveillance. A firm believer in the importance of alcohol abstinence and thrift, Ford saw the increased wage as an opportunity to instil his personal beliefs in the wider community"
1. "The Ford Motor Company established is own Sociological Department, employing an initial team of fifty and then a total of 160 'investigators' tasked with circulating in the community and paying impromptu visits to the homes of Ford's workers, each of whom needd to be confirmed as sober, thrifty (through making regular bank deposits), and 'clean of person' to quality for the new five-dollars-a-day renumeration scheme."
1. "The biases of men such as Ford might seem merely lamentable, a depressin reminder of the acceptability of anti-Semitic and racist views in respectable circles for much of the twentieth century and beyond. But the wealth and influence of philanthropic donors then and now renders the prejudices of leading 'humanitarians' more than simply lamentable. It makes philanthropy a matter of public concern"
1. "Jeff Skoll has suggested that 'at the world's great foundations, universities, and charitable institutions, social entrepeneurship has rapidly become the most influential idea of our time'. Ashoka founder Bill Drayton has suggested that the 'defining quality of leading social entrepreneurs is that they cannot come to rest until they have changed the pattern in their field all across society. Their life vision is the new pattern. Scholars and artists take delight in seeing and expressing an insight; professionals in serving a client... It is only the entrepreneurs who can't stop until they have changed the whole society'. Skoll's and Drayton's comments ar eoutlandish in equal measure. To suggest that it's 'only the entrepreneurs who can't stop until they have changed the whole society' makes a mockery of the historical legacy of the labourers who lost their lives at Homestead and Ludlow fighting for better working conditions. They, too, wanted to change society."
1. "Solving the world's problems is not exactly the senior prom. How many dance partners a foundation or social enterprise manages to secure might give a sense of their popularity but it doesn't prove that leverage produces actual results. Worse, it is difficult to measure counterfactuals, such as the cost of smaller organizations abandoning personal strategies in order to fall in line with more powerful voices."
1. "One rhetorical advantage of the ambiguity of the term 'social entrepreneur' is that it is so remarkably elastic that very few individuals working in global health, developemnt, or social services could escape the charge of being one."
1. "He suggests that social innovation can be understood as processes of change 'sometimes resulting from the work of heroic individuals...; sometimes as resulting from much broader movements of change..., or from market dynamics and organizational incentives.' This is so broad that a neighborhood eight-year-old selling, say, kiwi juice rather than lemonade might be called a social innovator. What, then, is unique about social innovation?"
1. "After winning the UK national election in 2010, the Coalition government traversed the UK publicizing the initiative through the use of colourful posters and banners carrying two slogans written in bold letters: 'Big Society' and 'Big Government'. The government apparently felt the British electorate needed some visual help grasping the vital importance of their message. On their publicity banners, the letter 'o' oin the phrase 'Big Society' was illustrated with a cartoon smiley face, while the 'o' in 'Big Government' was embellished with a frowney face." - LM, and I can not stress this enough, AO
1. "Despite the fact that private companies are often remarkably risk-averse, begging governments for a leg-up on innovation ladders, there's a widespread belief among the public and economists that private actors are inherently more innnovative and entrepreneurial than governments"
1. "Mazzucato has pointed out that the algorithm that led to Google's success was funded by a US National Science Foundation grant, and that the UK's Medical Research Council financed the early discovery of molecular antibodies instrumental to the develop(sic) of biotechonlogy, something that attracted venture capital only after government-funded research showed signs of promise."
1. "[Vodafone's] annual report indicated that it had paid no UK corporation tax at all. This tax saving came during a year when the company posted a post-tax profit of 59.4 billion pounds. Despite Vodafone's ample resources and history of tax avoidance, the UK ogvernment was kind enough to offer the company a no-strings grant to help get its mobile operations in East Africa off the ground. Which was lucky for Vodafone, because a company rep has gone on record stating that without the 1 million from DFID, he couldnever have persuaded Vodafone executives to invest in the venture."
1. "Dozens of studies have explored the effect of microfinance on poverty levels. Taken together, the studies indicate that even for the more successful programmes there's 'an absence of a clear statistical link between microfinance and poverty alleviation'. And that's i nthe case of the success stories. In cases documented in Bolivia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Pakistan, and Bosnia, microfinance had been shown to mire borrowers in crippling dept, worsening poverty rather than improving it"
1. "Progressives and conservatives alike often complain of the spectre of ‘double taxation’ – the levying of a tax by more than one jurisdiction on the same declared income. What’s happening in the world of large mega-philanthropies and their corporate beneficiaries is the spectre of double *exemption*. Despite being headquartered in Britain, Vodafone avoided paying UK corporation tax for *three straight years* - and that during a period of drastic government spending cuts. Then the Gates Foundation reduces Vodafone's expenses even further by offering the company's subsidiary non-repayable grants worth over $y million. Finally - and here's the double exemption part - the Gates Foundation's founders receive a tax break for their contribution to Vodacom, so US taxpayers lose out as well as UK ones."
1. "The problem when a society becomes dependent on the 'crumbs that fall from the rich man's table' is that those dining at the table have no legal obligation to continue flinging morsels to their feet."
1. "Perhaps the most far-reaching and sobering change fosterd by the new, avowedly hands-on philanthropy is that donors' bullish insistence on 'working with' grantees seems to have curtailed, if not entirely abolished, recognition of the fact that independence from a donor's self-interest is what makes a gift an actual gift."
1."During the 1990s, Nancy Olivieri, a haematologist, was involved with a University of Toronto–based clinical trial to test deferiprone, a drug used in the treatment of thalassaemia major, a blood disease affecting 200,000 children a year... During the course of a clinical trial funded by a company called Apotex to test deferiprone, Olivieri found signs of potentially lethal toxicity. Apotex threatened her with legal action when she asked to inform participants on the trial of the drug's risks. [paragraph break] The University of Toronto, which was negotiating at time (sic) with Apotex for a multimillion-dollar donation for a new building - the largest ever corporate gift to the university at the time - hrefused to support Olivieri's request. Brfeaching her aggreement with Apotex, Olivieri published her findings in the New England Journal of Medicine. She was dismissed  from her posiiton as director of the HOspital for Sick Children Program of Hemoglobinopathies, but was later reinstated."
1. "Speaking with the journalist Chrystia Freeland, Foster Fries, a Wyoming fund investor and deep-pocketed Republican supporter, made this point clear: ‘People don’t realize how wealthy people self-tax’, he suggested. ‘You look at Bill Gates, just gave $750 million, I think, to fight AIDS ... It's that top 1 per cent that probably contributes more to making the world a better place than the 99 per cent. I've never seen any poor people do what BIll Gates has done. I've never seen poor people hire many people." - Holy SHIT
1. "Less than fifteen years after Turner exhorted Gates to donate more of his personal fortune to charity, the New York Times ran an op-ed in which Gates was described as ‘the real secretary of education’. How has Gates, at one time a negligible actor in US philanthropy, managed to wield such influence over US education?"
1. "The NCLB has led to incentive schemes that tend to compound school failure through stripping funds from low-performing schools rather than increasing resources in a way that could help test scores improve."
1. "How can it be that a handful of donors has wielded such increased leverage over political decision-making?
The answer, as Ravitch argues, lies in a complex mixture of factors: vulnerable schools willing to reshape their policies in exchange for much-needed cash injections; bipartisan political support for recent market-based school reforms; and savvy publicity campaigns heavily funded by philanthropic organizations intent on building a grassroots base in local communities. The offer of a multimillion-dollar grant from a private foundation is often difficult ot refuse, even when a school board or superintendent must reorganize their priorities as a condition of the donation."
1. "Studies to date indicate that most charters perform either no better, or worse, than traditional public schools. Approximately four out of five – or over 80 per cent – of charter schools achieve no better test results than traditional public schools, and some are considerably worse."
1. "Two specific factors help to account for the succes of the charters that *do* earn outstanding results: increased resources and the freedom to send low-performing students back to traditional secondary and elementary schools."
1. "A number of studies have shown that the quality of a teacher is highly influential on student achievement, accounting for about 10–20 per cent of outcomes. What Guggenheim doesn’t mention is that factors outside a school matter a great deal more than teachers. Published in 1966, a government study known as the Coleman Report first provided evidence that external factors such as a parent's income and their own educational background, neighbourhood environment, and access to healthcare tend to account for two-thirds of a student's performance in school. Studies conducted since then have consistently confirmed this ratio. Recent research by Dan Goldhaber, an economist based at the University of Washington, backs up the Coleman Report"
1. "The 2006 results [of the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study and the Trends in International Math and Science Study] indicated that students in US schools where the poverty rate was less than 10 per cent came out first in science, first in reading, and third in math. As the poverty rate grew, student outcomes, not surprisingly, began to sink compared to other nations."
1. "Teachers at online schools – some of whom manage more than 250 students – have told media that they’re often pressured to pass students who do little work. Students who repeatedly fail to hand in assignments are kept indefinitely on rosters, allowing K12 to continue collecting state funds for their enrolment. Virtual schools are rife with 'ghost' pupils, students who are enrolled on the books but whose presence often can't be verified during state investigations into attendance records." - 'often' feels like it's doing a lot of work here.
1. "As Foucault once remarked of the prison system, while the inability to reduce incarceration rates may be seen on one level as a ‘failure,’ it is clear that that seeming failure is what bulwarks the continued sustenance and power of those tasked with implementing and managing the prison system. The same thing happens with philanthropy: it's a model of giving that is not imperilled by its own ineffectiveness. Rather, it thrives upon it."
1. "Given that the Gates Foundation spends less annually on global health than many rich nations, why is Bill Gates a regular presence at summits such as the G20 in 2011? And why has the WHO management taken to consulting the Gates Foundation on major policy decisions" - This feels like a rough framing for the author to use here? Why "less than many rich nations", vs "more than many poor nations"?
1. Arthur Caplan, an eminent bioethicist who himself suffered from polio as a child, has also criticized Gates’s obsession with polio eradication, pointing out that ‘government budgets and resources in poor nations are diverted from other far more pressing local problems to try and capture the last marginal cases.'"
1. But these efforts were undermined in 2011 when the CIA staged a fake vaccination drive, replete with agents masquerading as health workers, in order to obtain DNA samples from Osama bin Laden’s family members. The ruse proved crucial to rooting out bin Laden’s whereabouts in the days leading to his assassination. The plot also geopardized legitimate vaccinations efforts in the country, leading to a bloody backlash that continues to this day, as the Taliban and other extremist grtoups target polio health workers in retribution for the CIA's subterfuge."
1. "Sonia Shah, an award-winning journalist, has pointed out similar problems with eradication campaigns against malaria, efforts that, quite counter-intuitively, have caused money to flood to where it is least needed: the places where just a handful of cases persist. Five decades ago, more than ninety nations joined a scheme led by the US State Department and the WHO to eradicate malaria. After spending the equivalent of more than $9 billion in today's dollars, the campaign managed to vanquish malaria in a number of rich nations. But it also helped to fuel malaria outbreaks in endemic countries. The World Health Assembly quietly called for the ptrogramme's dissolution in 1969. Tibor Lepes, a former director of WHO's malaria control division, called the failed eradication programmed 'one of the greatest mistakes ever made in public health'."
1. "Eradicating a disease is, in several important respects, a goal diametrically opposed to controlling one. When public health leaders want to control a disease, they devote the majority of their resources to the areas of greatest need’, [Shah] writes. ‘When their goal is eradication, then they must spend their resources on areas where eradication is most likely - the areas with the least need.'."
1. "When Gates was presented with a proposal from some employees to write for the web rather than simply for Windows, he was incensed, shouting, ‘Why don’t you just give up your options and join the Peace Corps?’"
1. "useful for wealthy nations are the considerable subsidies that North American and European governments offer to their own domestic energy, pharmaceutical, and agriculture sectors. These subsidies make it difficult, if not impossible for poor countries to compete with western multinational firms. To give an illustration, in 2000, each cow in the European Union received $913 worth of agricultural subsidies, while each Sub-Saharan human being recieved about $8 in aid dollars."
1. "Companies such as Coca-Cola, Kraft, and Nestlé have vigorously resisted government campaigns to reduce sugar intake, challenging regulatory and taxation efforts that would see them better advertise the content of their products. In 2003, for example, the WHO released a report on diet and physical activity that recommended reducing sugar intake. In response, the sugar industry threatened to lobby the US government to cease its financial support for the UN agency. More recently, when asked why Michelle Obama's childhood obesity programmes were not being proposed as a model for developing countries, a US official replied that such a programme could harm US exports."
1. "The Gateses live in a 40,000 square-foot home set over five acres of wooded land in the Seattle suburb of Medina. It’s reported to feature a 100-visitor reception hall, an arcade, a bowling alley, a shooting range, a volleyball court, a hockey ring, a basketball court, a football stadium, and a garage reported to accommodate up to thirty cars, including a 1988 Porsche 989 coupe, which, due to its emissions and questional crash record, was not deemed streed legal in the US intil 1999, when a bill championed by Gates was signed into law by Bill Clinton."
1. "Labourers, of course, would have built the house. Perhaps they were well paid; perhaps they weren’t. And some of them, spiritual descendants, maybe, of housepainters such as Robert Noonan, would have been put to work inside the library. For there, engraved on the large domed ceiling, there's a quote from The Great Gatsby: 'He had come a long way to this blue lawn, and his dream must have seemed so close that he could hardly fail to grasp it'." - Something something media literacy. 
