Impression:

See *The Collapsing Empire*, a fun read, light stuff. Maybe not quite as deft as the first in the series.

Quotes/Annotations:
1."Eschatological" - The aspect of theology concerned with death+afterlife.
1. '"I don't know," Prim admitted. "It hasn't happened since Rachela."' - Incoming "vision" from Grayland in 3, 2, 1...
1. 'Rachela was chosen as the first "emperox." This new gender-neutral title had been chosen because market testing showed that it appealed to nearly all market segments as a fresh, new, and friendly spin on "emperor."' - God this is grim. Very VC.
1. "Rachela's prophecies did not ask people to change the way they lived, in the small-bore, everyday sense. It just asked them to swap out their system of governance, so that those at the very very top could have eve more power, control, and money than they had before. As it turned out, this was not too much to ask."
1. "Grayland I, Emperox of the Holy EMpiore of the Interdependent Stats and Mercantile Guilds, Queen of Hub and Associated Nations, Head of the Interdependent Church, Successor to Earth and Mother to ALl, Eighty-Eighth Emperox of the House of Wu, studied all these faces, taking in the expressions arrayed across the table, assessing the emotions of the nine arguably most powerful people in the known universe, aside from her. And then laughed. Which did not endear her further to them."
1. '"He always believed in having a plan B." "His plan B involved killing himself?" "People do dramatic things."' - Absolute madlad, Nadashe
1. "Not entirely sure how I'm going to eat after next week. But I suppose that's what the Interdependency minimum benefit is for." - At least this capitalist hellscape has UBI.
1. "It would be another 277 days before the final surviving crew member, a cargo handler named Jayn Brisfelt, would record a lengthy testimonial of the last, extraordinarily depressing days of the *Child* and her crew, before he would then go to the security office, obtain a sidearm, retire to one of the crew lounges, put on one of his favourite comedies, and then shoot himself mid-laugh during his favorite part of the story." - Fucking grim.
1. "It would take weeks of months for the news of the collapse of the Terhathum stream to reach all the systems of the Interdependency (including Terhathum itself, now nearly one month away from Hub), but within the Hub system, the effect was immediate: On the Hub Stocks and Commodities Exchange, stocks plunged and commodity futures collapsed and billions of marks' worth of value vaporized almost instantly..." - This hits a little differently post-Covid-19
1. "And you don't think that being emperox wasn't a substantial factor in people accepting. THat they might feel presure to have sex with yhou because you could, say, *wreck their lives*." - Power_dynamics_and_coerced_consent.jpg
1. '"Perhaps you should just tell this person you like them. THe worst that can happen is he says no." "I know." "And then you can have him exiled." "No,"  Cardenia said, and then paused. "Did you just make a joke?" "If it will make you fell better about what I just said, then yes, I did", said Attavio VI.'
1. '"Lord Teran Assan has asked for a meeting. ... He said he wants your wisdom about certain members of the executive committee. He's apparently finding a few of them difficult to reach a rapoirt with." "It's because he's an asshole."' - Correct.
1. 'Nadashe groaned, "Make the meeding [with Teran] as short as humanly possible."' - I'm glad everyone in universe hates this man as much as I do.
1. "Alas, poor Dorick." - Cute but.. was he named just to make this joke work?
1. "So here's what you're going to do. You're going to take that newly fucked-up face of yhours and you're going to go up the six floors to where your boss is sleeping, and you're going to wake her up. You're going to tell her that she fucking *missed*."
1. '"What kind of help?" Marce asked. "Help with the propulsion systems, for a start. Other technical assistance. Food - sorry,. not food, food stock. Things they can grow. Medical suppplies. Information. New technology." Church looked at Marce and said a word. Marce looked over to SEve. "Did he just say 'everything'?" "I think so, yeah."
1. '"Talk to them again. Maybe they'll tell you the same thing."    "I can't. He just died." It took Louentintu a minute to get it , but she got it. "That's unfortunate." "It certainly was for him."
1. '"That's rude," Chenevert said, and waited for the missiles to get within a hundred licks before lancing them with his beam weapons. They vaporized soundlessly in the void. "Your beams are coherent a hundred klicks out," Hanton said. "That's what I want this other ship to believe, yes," he said.' - Damn, dude
1. '"You're still toying with them, right?" Gamis asked. "If it makes you more comfortable if I say yes, then yes," Chenevert said.' - Incredible Ghost Dad energy here :eyes:
1. '"We need to talk about your sense of humor," Marce said, after he and every other human in the room recovered from their mini heart attacks. "Being semi-dead seems to have affected it." "It was like this before,... How do you think I died?"
1. '"Because the Fre Systems almost starved. They were as economically dependent on the other systems in the Assembly and Earth's confederation as we all are with each other. Jiyi says that numerous people pointed this out at the time, but the political will was to turn their backs on the other two unions." - Brexit intensifies
