Impression: 
I don't know what to make of the fact that apparently disaster tourism is a real thing.
I more or less flew through this work as a pretty easy read. The critique's not subtle,
but I'm pretty ok with that.


Quotes/Annotations:
1. "The guidebok mapped the location of the Nagasaki statues, but as she read, Yona had realised she didn't care where the statues were. Instead, she'd begin to wonder what exactly went missing when a person lost his or her life, and if the lost life was every found elsewhere. Yona was always wondering about this kind of unknown information - like where rocks that fell of the side of a mountain ended up."
1. "Disaster lay dormant in every corner, like depression."
1. "On a day like today, though, when Yona was inundated with work, she didn't have time to be bothered by distractions. Jungle didn't want her to waste her efforts with disgruntled customers, either. Yona was one of the brains of the company, not its lips." - Something tells me this book is going to have opinions about society.
1. "Yona received several emalis and phone calls after the meal, but she didn't answer them. She would rather not accept the fact that she'd been sexually harassed. Neither did she want to stand unashamed in the lobby and attack Kim. More specifically, she had no desire to join the group of victims, the has-beens and the losers, the dregs of the company. She thought again of what they had told her about the CCTV, that everyone already knew what had happened to her."
1. "Yona didn't mind the fishiness., Like the stimulating odour that hit your nose when entering a musty house, or a new place, it lasted only a moment. Most people grew used to the smell of their new surroundings, and never again experienced the exciting initial pungency."
1. "Centralia was a town in the United States that had been on fire for the past fifty years...Most residents had left. 'Isn't the movie Silent Hill about that town?'" - Like... the videogame movie?
1. "The warning sign posted at the entrance to the volcano tried hard to re-enact the horrors of the past, but the atmosphere didn't live up to such sombre descriptions. On one side of the group, local children were rolling around on the ground playing. Korean-style street stalls by the volcano's entrance stood ready to alleviate hunger. The available snacks included ramen and bowls of rice. Since Yona and the others were the only tourists, they felt a touch of guilt and decided to purchase some of the foods.. Yona saw a postcard featuring Indonesia's Mount Merapi, brazenly being sold her in Mui. She was again reminded why Jungle wanted to cancel this trip." - I'm beginning to think this book may not care for tourism.
1. "'If we hadn't been expressly told, would we even know this was a volcano?' Yona asked, 'It's not obvious at all." ' And doesn't this geyser just seem like a neighbourhood well?' the teacher added, describing a source of water bubbling in front of them. The group stood by the so-called geyser and flipped coins into it. The gurgling fountain taking their money wasn't even hot; its water had long cooled."
1. "On a disaster trip, travellers' reactions to their surroundings usually went through the following stages: Shock -> sympathy and compassion, and maybe discomfort -> gratefulness for their own lives -> a sense of responsibility and the feeling that they'd learned a lesson, and maybe an inkling of superiority for having survived. The stage someone reached depended on the person..."
1. "When the Jungle travellers reconvened, they realised that their accommodation and meals and activities had bene almost identical, regardless of whether they'd chosen Unda or Kanu. They'd met several locals inside a house on stilts, eaten some simple snacks, and then, after watching a traditional performance, they'd slept in similar rooms."
1. "'I'm sorry,' she told the child. 'I'm embarrassed to have made such a disturbance because of my carelessness.' Because she was speaking Korean, the crying child couldn't understand, but the important thing for Yona was that her fellow travellers heard..."
1. "'This was Chori's house,' he said. 'Everyone who lived here has moved away. Chori died three years ago, when he was eight. That was during Mui's tourism boom... His determination made him a hard worker, and he earned money carrying people's luggage on his back during desert tours... Eventually a pile of tourists' luggage fell on hardworking Chori and crushed him. It was a pointless death."
1. "Last night, a magnitude 8.0 earthquake had occurred nearby. The earthquake's aftershocks didn't reach Mui, but considering how the manager was acting, they might as well have. His anxiety had to do with the disaster recover programme he'd hoped to win for Mui. Now the island nearby which had been badly affected by the earthquake would become a strong candidate for it instead."
